20-Extras/readme.md, before:

# EXTRAS

> Stuff to discuss about...

## General Topics

- WebUntis via Powershell
- Active Directory or Azure Ad or MSGraph (or all!)
- Teams / Exchange / Sharepoint
- Scheduler

---

## Remote Access

> Link: [PowerShell remoting - PowerShell | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/learn/ps101/08-powershell-remoting?view=powershell-7.2)

- `Invoke-Command` and `PSSession`
  - [remote variables](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_remote_variables?view=powershell-7.2)

---

## Tutorials

### Full Paths

0. All about Powershell in MS Learn: [Powershell Search | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/search/?terms=powershell)

1. [Automate administrative tasks by using PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/paths/powershell/)
2. [Manage Microsoft Teams by using Windows PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/manage-microsoft-teams-use-windows-powershell/)
3. [Microsoft Graph Fundamentals](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/paths/m365-msgraph-fundamentals/)

---

### Special Topics

- MS Graph Get Started: [Get started with the Microsoft Graph PowerShell SDK](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/microsoftgraph/get-started?view=graph-powershell-1.0)

- Import Data (csv, XMl, json): [Import data in different formats for use in scripts](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/import-data-different-formats-for-use-scripts/)

- Azure AD intro: [Automate Azure tasks using scripts with PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/automate-azure-tasks-with-powershell/)
- Successor of Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) service:
  - [CimCmdlets Module](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/cimcmdlets/?view=powershell-7.2) (Common Information Model)
- `# requires`: [about Requires](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_requires?view=powershell-7.3)
- User Input in Scripts: [Use methods to accept user inputs in PowerShell scripts](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/use-methods-to-accept-user-inputs-windows-powershell-scripts/)

Commit message:

feat: added info ps2pdf polyshell

20-Extras/readme.md, after:

# EXTRAS

> Stuff to discuss about...
> Mentioned Tools

---

## Interesting Tools

- Convert Powershell script to executable: [ps2exe](https://www.powershellgallery.com/packages/ps2exe/1.0.4)
- Write one script - us it for cmd / powershell and bash: [polyshell](https://github.com/llamasoft/polyshell)

## General Topics

- WebUntis via Powershell
- Active Directory or Azure Ad or MSGraph (or all!)
- Teams / Exchange / Sharepoint
- Scheduler

---

## Remote Access

> Link: [PowerShell remoting - PowerShell | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/learn/ps101/08-powershell-remoting?view=powershell-7.2)

- `Invoke-Command` and `PSSession`
  - [remote variables](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_remote_variables?view=powershell-7.2)

---

## Tutorials

### Full Paths

0. All about Powershell in MS Learn: [Powershell Search | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/search/?terms=powershell)

1. [Automate administrative tasks by using PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/paths/powershell/)
2. [Manage Microsoft Teams by using Windows PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/manage-microsoft-teams-use-windows-powershell/)
3. [Microsoft Graph Fundamentals](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/paths/m365-msgraph-fundamentals/)

---

### Special Topics

- MS Graph Get Started: [Get started with the Microsoft Graph PowerShell SDK](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/microsoftgraph/get-started?view=graph-powershell-1.0)

- Import Data (csv, XMl, json): [Import data in different formats for use in scripts](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/import-data-different-formats-for-use-scripts/)

- Azure AD intro: [Automate Azure tasks using scripts with PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/automate-azure-tasks-with-powershell/)
- Successor of Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) service:
  - [CimCmdlets Module](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/cimcmdlets/?view=powershell-7.2) (Common Information Model)
- `# requires`: [about Requires](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_requires?view=powershell-7.3)
- User Input in Scripts: [Use methods to accept user inputs in PowerShell scripts](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/use-methods-to-accept-user-inputs-windows-powershell-scripts/)
